| Guaka/Wikimania_2007                                                         | 20070514201511 | * an English title

MySquad - welcome to the Adventure Economy

* a short English abstract of 50 to 100 words. The abstracts should be provided as plain text, and not as file attachments. This abstract will be used as public description of your submission in the conference program

We coin the '''adventure economy''' to refer to a gift economy that is pay-forward, in-person, global and among strangers. In any economy, there are challenges in allocating resources effectively and avoiding abuse, but these are of special concern in non-market economies among strangers, where we don't have the information mechanisms of the price system nor of social relations, and we are also missing the risk-reduction mechanisms of contracts. '''MySquad''' is a first step towards the realization of the Adventure Economy.

* a detailed description (or full paper) of at least one page (300 words or more). This description will not be published unless you want it, but used for reviewing your submission. Give an overview of the areas to be covered or taught. State clearly the relevance to the Wikimedia projects and whether submission concerns a specific wiki project. You may use any language, but we strongly suggest English or Chinese. Full descriptions may include a link to a full paper or slides in HTML or PDF, if available.

We coin the '''adventure economy''' to refer to a gift economy that is pay-forward, in-person, global and among strangers. In any economy, there are challenges in allocating resources effectively and avoiding abuse, but these are of special concern in non-market economies among strangers, where we don't have the information mechanisms of the price system nor of social relations, and we are also missing the risk-reduction mechanisms of contracts.

Now, imagine a real-world geolocative issue tracking system, where people can report material/immaterial needs and excesses via txt and GPS, imagine an army of on-the-ground agents, delivery and pickup people, do-gooders, imagine a (smaller) army of dispatchers, on the web, looking at issues reported in real-time and dispatching instructions/assignment to do-gooder agents.
You're on the street, you txt "+burrito +30m L:mission and 30th", that means you have 30 minutes available and an extra burrito. You get an assignment, you deliver the burrito. Maneki Neko (Bruce Sterling, 1999), only with real people dispatching instead of "AI"s.
"+coffee_table L:nw dolores park" "problem here: sad homeless guy L:mission and 3rd". twittervision.com, ripple.sf.net, some people from couchsurfing.com. Proof of concept, [http://code.google.com/p/mysquad/ running code].


* full name, email address, and a short bio of 1–3 sentences for each author. You may also add wiki usernames and nicknames.

Joe Edelman, joe.edelman@gmail.com, wiki username: JoeEdelman

Joe operates in a difficult space between economics, the arts, entertainment, and the global internet.  He is trying to lead the revolution and to make it beautiful and fun.  He's worked in research labs, dance companies, and disaster relief organizations, and is currently starting a company to work on open source on-the-ground mobile coordination technology.  He went to Dartmouth and MIT and now lives in Northampton, MA USA.

..

Kasper Souren, kasper.souren@gmail.com, wiki username: Guaka

Kasper was born in the Netherlands, where he studied mathematics and electronic music. Wikis distracted him from his (abandoned) PhD on AI in Paris. He then volunteered for Geekcorps Mali, became involved with Wikipedias in African languages. After which he embarked upon a RTW trip of hitchhiking and [http://couchsurfing.com CouchSurfing]. He [http://opencouchsurfing.org volunteered for the CouchSurfing organization]. 

* the type of submission (presentation, poster, workshop, panel, BoF, artistic)

Presentation.

* the language(s) you are going to talk in (or the language of your poster)

English |

 -|
